= *Qucs-S: Help and Reference Documentation +
Release 0.0.23-S*
*Mike Brinson and Vadim Kusnetsov (2015 to 2022)*
:stem: latexmath

*Authors Mike Brinson (mbrin72043@yahoo.co.uk) and Vadim Kusnetsov
(re3xdh@gmail.com)*

*Copyright 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018 and 2022*

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation.

== Background and an overview of Qucs-S

Following the release of Qucs-0.0.18 in August 2014 the Qucs Development
Team considered in detail a number of possible directions that future
versions of the software could take. Qucs-S is one of these routes. It
addresses a number of problems observed while attempting to combine Qucs
with the best features of other Free Open Source Software (FOSS) SPICE
circuit simulation packages. The Qucs-S project aims to add additional
model development tools to those currently available in Qucs while
retaining a high degree of compatibility with de facto industrial SPICE
simulation. Qucs was originally written as an RF and microwave
engineering design tool which provided features not found in SPICE, like
for example, S-parameter simulation and RF network synthesis. Since it
was first released under the General Public License (GPL) in 2003 Qucs
has provided users with a relatively stable, flexible and reasonably
functional circuit simulation package, particularly for RF circuit
design and analysis. Qucs-S was first released for general use in 2016.
The last stable Qt4 version ( Qucs-S 0.0.22) being available since
January 2020. The primary purpose of Qucs-S is to provide a range of
device modelling, circuit design and simulation tools that meet the
needs of academia and industry. In February 2022 Qucs-S 0.0.23 was
released for general use. This is the first version of Qucs-S ported to
Qt5. Originally, it was intended that Qucs-S would at some point merge
back with Qucs. However, this is no longer considered likely due to
significant divergence between the two software packages. Qucs-S is also
developing rapidly with each new release. Today it has become a stable
device modelling, simulation and data processing tool with the best
features of Qucs and SPICE that are central to a FOSS package of
surprising power and utility.

One of the most often requested Qucs-S features is "better
documentation", especially documentation outlining the use and
limitations of the simulation and the modelling features built into
Qucs-S. Qucs-S is a large and complex package which is very flexible in
the way it can be used as a circuit design aid. Hence, however much
documentation is written describing its functionality there are always
likely be simulation and modelling examples that are missing from the
documentation. In future new Qucs-S releases will be accompanied by a
set of documentation. This will introduces a range of simulation and
modelling topics and present a number of typical circuit simulation and
compact device modelling examples. In the text these are also linked to
Qucs-S reference material. The Qucs and Qucs-S Development Teams, and
other authors, have published a body of work concerning Qucs/Qucs-S and
their applications. A bibliography of these publications can be found at
the end of this document. Anyone interested in learning about Qucs-S is
recommended to read them as they provide a wealth of information on
basic and advanced topics. The Qucs-S documentation is very much work in
progress. Moreover, to keep everyone up to date with current
developments it is planned to updated them during future Qucs-S
development phases.

=== Introduction to Qucs-S

Three of the primary aims of the work undertaken by the Qucs-S
Development Team are firstly to remove software bugs and improve the
overall performance of the package, secondly to address known weaknesses
and limitations and thirdly to develop the package by adding features
which increase itâ€™s utility. Readers who are not familiar with open
source software development may be unaware of how the process works. By
"Qucs-S Development Team" we mean a group of interested individuals who
freely give both their time and expertise for the improvement of the
Qucs-S package. The Qucs-S Development Team is not a fixed group but
rather a dynamic organisation where individuals contribute,
simultaneously or at different times, to the same part or separate parts
of the software. The Qucs-S group was formed to address the known
limitations of the previous Qucs releases and to take advantage of the
work done by other GPL circuit simulation teams working on the Ngspice
(http://ngspice.sourceforge.net/), Xyce (https://xyce.sandia.gov/) and
SPICE OPUS (http://www.spiceopus.si/) simulation engines. The Qucs-S
project is an ongoing initiative which attempts to:

*  Correct known weaknesses observed with the Qucs analogue simulation
engine "qucsator". Qucsator is based on classical numerical mathematics
routines for the solution of electrical networks, linear and non-linear
real and complex equations and time domain algebraic and differential
equations. For small circuits, qucsator works well in the DC and AC
small signal domains. However it does appear to have propblems in the
transient and Harmonic Balance simulation domains, where it can fail to
converge to an acceptable solution. Its performance is also often below
that expected of a modern circuit simulator employing sparse matrix
algorithms.
*  Provide Qucs-S users with a choice of SPICE simulation engines
selected from Ngspice, Xyce and SPICE OPUS. By selecting Ngspice, Xyce
or SPICE OPUS users may capitalise on all the features offered by the
extensive SPICE developments which have taken place over the last fifty
years. Ngspice, Xyce and SPICE OPUS offer improved transient simulation
convergence and speed, particularly for large non-linear circuits. Xyce
brings a stable implementation of single and multi-tone Harmonic Balance
simulation to Qucs-S with much improved convergence properties for both
linear and non linear components and devices. The latest version of
Xyce, 7.4 at the time of writing, also offers, for example, S-parameter
and transient domain sensitivity analysis. In contrast, SPICE OPUS adds
the transient shooting method for steady state analysis of time domain
signals and extensive optimization methods.
* Extend Qucs subcircuit, Equation-Defined Device (EDD), Radio Frequency
Equation-Defined Device (RFEDD) and Verilog-A device modelling
capabilities. The latest Qucs-S offers much improved component and
device modelling features that work as interlinked tools, supporting
model development as a continuous flow from physical concept to compiled
C/C++ code. This feature is centred around a "turn-key" version of the
XSPICE Code Model construction tools. It is also possible to synthesis
Ngspice, Xyce and SPICE OPUS netlists from Qucs-S schematics and to
synthesise Verilog-A models from Qucs EDD and SPICE B components.
Further improvements to the Verilog-A module development tool chain are
planned.
* Offer Qucs-S users access to the additional simulation tools and extra
component and device models provided by Ngspice, Xyce and SPICE OPUS.
This includes much improved component library facilities which allow the
use of device manufacturers SPICE models and XSPICE Code Models
* Offer with Qucs-S a true mixed-mode analogue-digital circuit
simulation capability using Qucs-S/Ngspice/SPICE OPUS/XSPICE simulation.

.

The Qucs-S project is on going and must be considered as very much work
in progress. In its early releases not all the features introduced in
the text will be available for public use. It is however, the intention
of the Qucs-S Development Team to introduce them as quickly as possible.
Other features not listed may also be introduced.

image::pics/chap1/QUCS-S-CH1-Fig1.pdf[A block diagram outlining the
Qucs-S simulation and modelling tools.,width=453]

=== Qucs-S structure

A block diagram showing the main analogue modelling and simulation
functions of the Qucs-S package are illustrated in Figure 1.1. For
convenience, particularly easy identification, blocks with similar
modelling or simulation functions have been coded with identical
colours, for example dark red indicates the Qucs-S GUI and dark blue the
major simulation engines. The direction of data flow between blocks is
also indicated with arrows. Central to the operation of Qucs-S is a
graphical user interface (GUI), the Ngspice, Xyce and SPICE OPUS
simulation engines and a post simulation data processing feature (brown
block) for the extraction of device and circuit parameters and the
visualisation of simulated signal waveforms. The brown block in Figure
1.1 includes the well known Octave numerical analysis package
(https://www.gnu.org/software/octave/). Qucs-S uses Octave for advanced
post simulation data processing related tasks.

=== A first look at the extended Qucs-S device modelling and simulation features

At this point it seems appropriate to introduce a short example which
demonstrates how much Qucs-S has evolved since the release of Qucs
version 0.0.18 when Qucs-S development began. This example has been
deliberately chosen to present an overview of a number of new features
either already developed by the Qucs-S project or planned for future
releases. To provide readers with adequate information on how to make
the best use of the new features they are described in detail in later
chapters of this document.

image::pics/chap1/Qucs-S-Ch1-Fig2A.pdf[Equation representation of a
semiconductor tunnel diode with latexmath:[Id = f(Vd)], including device
model parameters, model equations and DC scan test. ,width=453]

Qucs-S is a surprisingly sophisticated program with quite a number of
hidden features which are not obvious to most users who are not familiar
with the software. Given in Figure link:#FigCH1-2[1.2] is a circuuit
schematic which demonstrates a little known application of the Qucs
family of circuit simulators. Qucs-S is ideal for developing high level
behavioural models of new devices or circuits which are not distributed
with the release software.

image::pics/chap1/Qucs-S-CH1-Fig3.pdf[Qucs-S EDD behavioural model for
the tunnel diode. ,width=453]

The schematic in Figure link:#FigCH1-2[1.2] introduces the physical
equations and device parameters for a semiconductor tunnel diode. By
using the Qucs-S parameter sweep and DC simulation operations it is
possible to scan the diode bias voltage latexmath:[Vpn], calculate the
tunnel diode bias current latexmath:[Ipn] at each bias point and plot
the device latexmath:[id = f(vd)] characteristics. Note that in this
introductory example the Qucs schematic does not include any electrical
components. Moreover, the tunnel diode current is calculated directly
from its physical *model equations* and *model parameters*. Illustrated
in Figure link:#FigCH1-3[1.3] is a second model for the tunnel diode
plus a test circuit for simulating the device DC current versus voltage
characteristics. It shows how a Qucs-S Equation Defined Device (EDD)
represents the physical model of the tunnel diode and how this model can
be represented with itâ€™s own symbol and tested by combining it with
other components to form a DC characteristic test circuit. The Qucs EDD
is not implemented in SPICE 2 and 3 simulators. However, SPICE 3 and
later simulators have other similar features, including the B
independent voltage and current sources.

image::pics/chap1/Qucs-S-CH1-Fig4.pdf[A Verilog-A compact tunnel diode
model and test circuit. ,width=491]

The Qucs-S EDD component has one feature which makes it particularly
important for developing compact device simulation models, namely that
its structure and modelling capabilities are similar to those available
with the Verilog-A hardware description language. Hence, once a Qucs-S
EDD model is operating satisfactorily it can be transcribed into a
Verilog-A compact model by inspection or by computer synthesis. Such a
Verilog-A model and test circuit is shown in Figure link:#FigCH1-4[1.4].
One of the main aims of the Qucs-S initiative is to improve Qucs compact
device modelling capabilities and to streamline the flow of information
between each part of the modelling and simulation sequence. In all Qucs
releases prior to the Qucs-S project a number of modelling tools were
implemented in the distribution software but users had to translate
manually each type of model format to other formats if they wished to
use a model with a different simulator or modelling tool. One exception
was the rudimentary translation tool called *qucsconv* for translating
SPICE netlists to Qucs netlist format. It is not possible to simulate
Qucs models encoded in the Qucs netlist format with a SPICE simulator or
to generate a Verilog-A code model directly from a Qucs EDD model. This
situation will change significantly as the Qucs-S project moves forward:
in the medium to long term a number of synthesis-translation routines
will be added to Qucs-S making the process of model translation
transparent to the Qucs-S user. The first of these is the link between
the Qucs netlist format and the Ngspice, Xyce and SPICE OPUS simulator
netlist formats. Figure link:#FigCH1-5[1.5] lists an Ngspice simulation
netlist generated by Qucs-S.

image::pics/chap1/Qucs-S-CH1-Fig5.pdf[A synthesized Ngspice netlist for
the tunnel diode circuit.,width=377]

Notice that this netlist is not simply a list of SPICE component
statements but includes an embedded Ngnutmeg script between the SPICE
*.control .... and .... .endc* statements. Figures link:#FigCH1-6[1.6]
and link:#FigCH1-7[1.7], introduce a user defined XSPICE Code Model for
the tunnel diode example. A new extension to the Qucs-S compact device
modelling capabilities adds a "turn-key" feature which allows user
defined XSPICE Code Models to be added to Qucs-S and automatically
compiled to C code by the package.

image::pics/chap1/Qucs-S-CH1-Fig6.pdf[XSPICE tunnel diode test
circuit.,width=377]

=== Qucs-S usage

The previous section presented a very brief outline of a number of the
modelling and simulation features provided by Qucs-S. For many readers
device modelling will not be their primary reason for using Qucs-S.
Qucs-S combines the best of the original Qucs schematic capture features
with the power of SPICE circuit simulation, making the software a good
choice as a tool for both printed circuit and integrated circuit design,
particularly for academic and industrial use. New simulation features,
like S-parameter and Harmonic Balance analysis plus transient
sensitivity add capabilities that take Qucs-S way beyond those
implemented in the original SPICE 2 and 3 circuit simulators. More on
these topics and all the others introduced earlier can be found in later
sections of this document.

image::pics/chap1/Qucs-S-CH1-Fig7.pdf[XSPICE tunnel diode model
code.,width=264]

== Basic Ngspice, Xyce and SPICE OPUS simulation

=== Introduction

This section describes a number of fundamental methods for launching
circuit simulations from the Qucs-S GUI using the Ngspice, Xyce and
SPICE OPUS compatible simulator engines. Qucs-S includes built-in
support for SPICE via a subsystem specifically designed for this
purpose. The Ngspice, Xyce and SPICE OPUS simulators are not embedded in
Qucs-S but operate as independent external simulators. Before use they
must be installed on the computer operating system that you are running
Qucs-S. Although Ngspice, Xyce and SPICE OPUS are all compatible SPICE
simulators they also include extensions to the original SPICE 3f5
netlist syntax which are often incompatible and may not simulate on each
of the three external simulators. The Qucs-S Development Team are aware
of this limitation and are attempting to identify and correct such
problems as quickly as possible. Please note this may take some time.
However, if you do identify a compatibility bug, or indeed any bug,
please inform us by sending in a bug report to the Qucs-S web site (with
an example test schematic if possible) describing the problem you have
identified.

=== Supported simulators

==== Ngspice

Ngspice is a mixed-level/mixed-signal circuit simulator implemented from
three open source software packages: SPICE 3f5, Cider 1b1 and XSPICE.
Ngspice is one of the most widely used and stable current generation
open source SPICE simulators available. It implements the original
SPICE3f5 simulation capabilities, including for example, DC, AC, and
transient simulation, Fourier-analysis, and DC and AC sensitivity
analysis, plus a significant number of extra simulation and device
modelling extensions, including S-parameter network analysis (from
release Ngspice-37). Distributed with Ngspice is a data manipulation
package called Ngnutmeg. This provides numerical analysis and
visualisation routines for post processing Ngspice simulation data.
Instructions for installing Ngspice can be found on the Ngspice website
at http://ngspice.sourceforge.net/download.html, The Ngspice website
also gives free access to all the binary distribution and the
development code sources.

==== Xyce

Xyce is an open source, SPICE-compatible, high-performance parallel
analogue circuit simulator that is capable of solving extremely large
circuit problems when installed on large-scale parallel computing
platforms. It also supports serial execution on all common desktop
platforms, and small-scale parallel operation on Unix-like systems. Xyce
for Linux and Microsoft Windows can be downloaded from the official Xyce
website at https://xyce.sandia.gov/Xyce. The Xyce parallel circuit
simulator running on Linux requires installation of the openMPI
libraries. Qucs-S supports both Xyce-Serial and Xyce-Parallel software
(not currently available for the Microsoft Windows operating system).

==== SPICE OPUS

SPICE OPUS is an improved version of SPICE based on SPICE 3 code with
extensions for circuit and device performance optimization and the
transient simulation shooting method for large signal steady state
analysis. SPICE OPUS can be downloaded from its official website at
http://www.spiceopus.si/.

=== General simulation methods

The starting point for understanding how the SPICE extensions are built
into the Qucs-S GUI is to study the basic operations needed to simulate
circuit schematics with external simulators. For this purpose consider
the RCL test circuit shown in Figure link:#Fig8[2.1].

image::pics/chap2/RCL.pdf[An RCL test circuit for demonstrating Ngspice,
Xyce and SPICE OPUS simulation controlled from Qucs-S.,width=415]

This schematic specifies two simulations: (1) AC simulation from 4 MHz
to 12 MHz and (2) Transient simulation from 0 to 5 us. Draw the
schematic drawn in Figure link:#Fig8[2.1] with Qucs-S. Make sure the
schematic is entered correctly then simulate it with Ngspice using the
sequence "Simulation latexmath:[->] Simulate", or by pressing key F2.
After Qucs-S finishes the AC and transient simulations, plot the output
data listed below:

* The frequency domain input and output voltage waveforms (given by
vatages at the â€œVinâ€œ and â€œVrâ€œ nodes ) - your plots should be similar to
those shown in Figure link:#Fig8[2.1],
* The current in the frequency domain (â€œPr1â€œ current probe, )
* The transient current waveform, sensed by the current probe â€œPr1â€œ.

image::pics/chap2/simDialog.pdf[ External simulator dialogue: where
button *Simulate* launches a circuit simulation, button *Stop* causes a
running simulation to finish; button *Save netlist* generates, and
stores, the netlist of the circuit being simulated and button *Exit*
closes the external simulator dialogue.,width=491]

Qucs-S allows schematic component properties to be defined in the same
way as the original Qucs software. Component values and other icon
properties are converted automatically into SPICE compatible netlist
format. There is no need for manual adaptation by users. However, please
note that not all the predefined Qucs components are available for
simulation with Ngspice, Xyce or SPICE OPUS. A number of tables provided
in later sections of the text list which components can be used with
which simulator. Following placement and wiring of components, plus the
addition of one or more simulation icons, SPICE simulation is launched
using the Qucs-S menu sequence *Simulation* latexmath:[->] *Simulate* or
by pressing key *F2*. An *External* latexmath:[->] *simulator* dialogue
then appears. This is illustrated in Figure link:#Fig10[2.3].

image::pics/chap2/Simsett.pdf[*Setup simulator executable locations*
dialogue.,width=264]

If the Ngspice, Xyce or SPICE OPUS installation directories are not
included in the operating system shell *$PATH* statement the location of
their executable code must be registered with Qucs-S before the Ngspice
Xyce or SPICE OPUS simulations will work. This step is necessary for all
the operating systems used to run Qucs-S. To register external circuit
simulator installation directories Qucs-S users need to launch the
*Select default simulator*, from the *Simulate* dialogue. The resulting
*Setup simulators executable simulator location* dialogue is illustrated
in Figure link:#Fig10[2.3].

In this dialogue enter the absolute address of the Ngspice, Xyce or
SPICE OPUS executable program code from the keyboard or by pressing the
appropriate *Open File Select button*. In the case of the Xyce Parallel
simulator the number of processors installed in your computer system
must also be entered from the keyboard or selected using the dialogue
up-down arrow controls. Please note the Xyce parallel command line for
binary Xyce-Parallel package is
link:<Path_to_xyce_executable>/xmpirun[<Path_to_xyce_executable>/xmpirun]
-np %p, where Qucs-S substitutes the number of processors for the %p
wildcard entry. Also please note that "user builds" of Xyce-Parallel
have no *xmpirun* script, implying that the full script must be
completed by users during the external simulators set up process, for
example if *opeMPI* is installed in directory /usr/bin and Xyce-Parallel
installed in /usr/local/Xyce_Parallel the command line is:

/usr/bin/mpirun -np %p /usr/local/Xyce_Parallel/bin/Xyce.

Qucs-S users can also define a directory where temporary simulator data
and netlists are stored: this working directory is by default assumed to
be at $HOME/.qucs/spice4qucs.

image::pics/chap2/conScreen.pdf[ A section of an Ngspice execution Log
displayed in the *Simulate with an external simulator* dialogue
window.,width=453]

image::pics/chap2/RCLnetlist.pdf[RCL Ngspice netlist. ,width=264]

To simulate a Qucs schematic with the Ngspice simulator, select
simulator *Ngspice* and press the *Simulate* button shown in Figure
link:#Fig9[2.2]. During simulation Ngspice produces a simulation log.
This is displayed in the *External simulator* dialog window, see Figure
2.4. The Log text is also saved at Qucs-S system Log location
$HOME/.qucs/log.txt. This can be viewed using the drop down menue
sequence *Simulation* latexmath:[->] *Show last messages* (or by
pressing key *F5*). If the Ngspice simulation fails, any errors reported
during simulation are listed in simulation Log window. Similarly, a
successful completion of a Qucs-S/Ngspice simulation is reported.

A novel feature introduced by Qucs-S is its ability to generate and save
SPICE netlist files from the information contained in a Qucs schematic.
To save the SPICE netlist file for the current simulation press the
*Save netlist* button shown in Figure link:#Fig9[2.2]. This process
causes a SPICE netlist to be saved as file *netlist.cir* in the
~/.qucs/spice4qucs directory. The generated netlist for the RCL test
example is listed in Figure link:#Fig12[2.5].

The simulation sequence introduced in the previous sections of the
Qucs-S -help text also applies to the Xyce and SPICE OPUS simulators.
However, the information displayed in the simulation log is likely to be
different for each simulator and indeed operating systems. After an
Ngspice, Xyce or SPICE OPUS simulation has successfully completed close
the *External simulation* dialogue by pressing the *Exit* button. The
simulation data generated by a Qucs-S simulation is available for
plotting using the existing Qucs visualisation routines: either drag a
diagram icon, or table icon, onto the current Qucs-S schematic window or
onto the associated Qucs-S display page. After a diagram or table is
placed a *Diagram properties* dialog appears. On selecting the dataset
for the current simulation the output quantities become available for
plotting or tabulating in a similar fashion to the original Qucs
software. Ngspice, Xyce and SPICE OPUS simulation data output is in
raw-binary SPICE 3f5 output format. Results from different types of
simulation, for example SPICE AC and TRAN, are combined into a single
Qucs-S dataset. Qucs-S adds an appropriate suffix to each simulator
dataset name in order to avoid name clashes and mixing up results from
different types of simulation. In the RCL test example the Qucs-S
schematic is named *RCL.sch*, yielding Ngspice, Xyce and SPICE OPUS
simulations result in three different datasets:

* *RCL.dat.ngspice* â€” for Ngspice
* *RCL.dat.xyce* â€” for Xyce
* *RCL.dat.spopus* â€” for SPICE OPUS

All three datasets have an extension *dat* to signify that each set
contains Qucs-S data for post simulation visualisation. The Ngspice,
Xyce and SPICE OPUS datasets also include a second extension to the file
name to identify the name of the external Qucs-S simulator. The Dataset
selector (see Figure link:#Fig13[2.6]) shows only the base names of a
dataset.

image::pics/chap2/Diagr_dlg.pdf[*Diagram properties* dialogue, listing
the selected simulator and the available simulation data names.
,width=529]

Users must also select the appropriate simulator from the **simulator
name selecto**r drop-down list. This only gives existing simulator
datasets which prevents users from selecting non-existent datasets by
mistake. Following the selection of a specific data set users must
select the variables that are to be plotted. Qucs-S preserves SPICE
notation for *node voltage* names and *current probe* names. SPICE names
are assumed to be case insensitive by Qucs-S, for example

* *v(out)* â€” Voltage at node *out*
* *i(Pr1)* â€” Current recorded by probe *Pr1*

The Qucs-S extension also adds a simulation-dependent prefix to each
variable name in order to differentiate output variables from different
SPICE simulations, for example *ac.* for AC simulation, *tran.* for
transient simulation, and *dc.* or DC-sweep. There are also individual
prefixes for each simulator:

* *ngspice/* â€”â€“ Ngspice simulator prefix;
* *xyce/* â€”â€“ Xyce simulator prefix;
* *spopus/* â€”â€“ SPICE OPUS prefix;

Hence for example, the full name of variable from an Ngspice simulation
could be *ngspice/v(out)*. This naming system helps to avoid dataset
name conflicts. Individual items for plotting are selected by double
clicking on a name in the variable list. As an example when double
clicking on *ac.i(pr1)* its name is copied by Qucs into the right-hand
plotting window. Like the original Qucs one or more variable items may
be selected for plotting on the same 2D or 3D graph. Finally pressing
the *Apply* button shown at the bottom of Figure 2.5. causes the
selected variable items to be plotted. The plotted simulation results
for the external Ngspice AC simulation of the RCL test circuit are shown
in Figure link:#Fig14[2.7]. Plotting the transient simulation data for
the RCL test example follows the same procedure as the sequence
described for the AC simulation except that in the transient plot
variables with *tran* in their name are selected, see Figure
link:#Fig15[2.8].

image::pics/chap2/RCL_ac.pdf[ External SPICE AC simulation magnitude
response for the current flowing in RCL circuit with a series resonant
peak of roughly 8 MHz. ,width=453]

image::pics/chap2/RCL_tran.pdf[ Transient simulation voltage waveforms
at the input and output nodes of the RCL circuit. ,width=453]

A similar procedure is adopted for plotting simulation data generated
with the Xyce and SPICE OPUS simulators. Readers should make sure they
can simulate the example RCL circuit with both Xyce and SPICE opus, then
plot the resulting simulation data. More advanced techniques for post
processing, plotting and undertaking a range of different visualization
processes using Qucs-S and Octave are outlined in later chapters of this
document.

=== Variable names

As part of the Qucs-S extensions Ngspice and Xyce simulation variable
names are converted from the original Qucs notation to SPICE notation
and vice versa. Table 2.1 shows the correspondence between the two
notations. Also variable prefixes are used to designate data from
different simulators (Table 2.2)

[[Table1]]
.Qucs and SPICE variable equivalences
[cols="<,<,<",options="header",]
|===
|*Variable type* |*Qucs display notation* |*SPICE display notation*
|DC node voltage |Node.V |V(node)
|AC node voltage |Node.v |ac.v(node)
|TRAN node voltage |Node.Vt |tran.v(node)
|HB node voltage |Node.Vb |hb.v(node)
|DC probe current |Pri.I |i(pri)
|AC probe current |Pri.i |ac.i(pri)
|TRAN probe current |Pri.It |tran.i(pri)
|===

[[Table2]]
.Qucs and SPICE variable name prefixes
[cols="<,<",options="header",]
|===
|*Prefix* |*Explanation*
|*Node.Vt* |Qucs simulation, default dataset
|*dataset:Node.Vt* |Qucs simulation, external dataset
|*ngspice/tran.v(node)* |Ngspice simulation, default dataset
|*xyce/tran.v(node)* |Xyce simulation, default dataset
|*xyce/dataset:tran.v(node)* |Xyce simulation, external dataset
|*spopus/tran.v(node)* |SPICE OPUS simulation, default dataset
|*spopus/dataset:tran.v(node)* |SPICE OPUS simulation, external dataset
|===

=== DC simulation

Conventional SPICE 3f5 simulation commands OP and DC are not implemented
by Qucs or indeed by Qucs-S. Instead more convenient versions of these
simulation commands are implemented. These alternative forms are linked
directly to circuit schematic capture, making them easy to use.
Moreover, they provide Qucs-S users with a power full diagnostic and
analysis tools for investigating basic circuit operation. The circuit
shown in Figure 2.8 represents a simple resistive network with single
voltage and current 1 V and 1 A sources respectively. Pressing key "F8"
instigates a DC analysis and adds the DC node voltages, probe voltages
and probe currents to the current schematic. This feature provides a
practical method for scanning a circuit to see if the DC bias values are
of the correct order of magnitude. The calculation of DC bias values via
the F8 key applies to all the circuit simulators controlled by Qucs-S.
Schematics which include the Qucs0S DC icon do not however, list a
similar set of voltage and currents in the *Simulate with an external
Simulator* dialogue window. In contrast, a DC voltage and current list
is output when a schematic includes a transient simulation icon, see
Figure 2.9.

image::pics/chap2/DC_list.pdf[A simple linear resistive electrical
network driven by single DC voltage and current sources: DC node
voltages (V) and voltage probe values (V) are illustrated in blue and
current probe values (A) in green.,width=453]

Qucs does not define a separate analysis type which is equivalent to the
original SPICE 2g6 "DC sweep" simulation or the extended SPICE 3f5
version which allows current and voltage source scans plus resistor
value scans. In contrast to SPICE the Qucs-S equivalent *DC sweep* is
just a specific case of the more general Qucs *Parameter sweep*
capability. To emulate the original SPICE DC sweep Qucs0S use a
combination of DC simulation plus the parameter sweep of an independent
DC voltage or DC current source or of a resistor numerical value. When
the Qucs-S SPICE netlist builder finds these two linked types of
simulation it synthesises them into a *DC* SPICE netlist entry. This
procedure is demonstrated in Figure link:#Fig18[2.10]. where the test
circuit consists of a diode DC bias network connected as a test bench
for simulating the non-linear DC current-voltage characteristic of a
1N4148 diode. This example can be found in the Qucs examples directory
tree listed as examples\ngspice\diode.sch.

Please note the following differences between SPICE and Qucs DC-sweep
simulation:

* Specify a sweep source name or a resistor name *NOT* a source or
resistor value; for example in Figure 2.10 *V1*,
* SPICE model parameters can be swept using the notation *Device.Param*,
for example *T1.Bf* to sweep the *Bf* parameter of transistor *T1*.

image::pics/chap2/Diode_DC.pdf[Test circuit and simulated DC
current-voltage characteristics for a 1N4148 silicon diode.,width=604]

image::pics/chap2/tran_DC_list.pdf[A screen dump showing transient
simulation initial DC simulation voltage and current values in (V) and
(A) respectively for the resistive circuit given in Figure 2.8: NOTE
that the voltage and current variable names are output in SPICE style
syntax.,width=453]

=== AC simulation

Small signal AC simulation is fully supported by Qucs-S. It doesnâ€™t
require any special adaptation. Just simple place the *AC simulation*
component icon on a schematic and execute an Ngspice, Xyce or SPICE OPUS
simulation. Variable name conversions are listed in Table
link:#Table1[2.1]. The Qucs-S dataset builder adds prefix *ac.* to all
variables generated by an AC simulation. Ngspice, Xyce and SPICE OPUS
small signal frequency domain AC simulations use linear, logarithmic.
list and constant frequency scales.

=== TRANsient simulation

Transient simulation is also fully supported by Qucs-S. Just place the
*Transient simulation* component icon on a schematic and simulate it.
There is a difference between the way the Ngspice, Xyce and SPICE OPUS
simulators implement transient simulation time steps. The original Qucs
simulation engine Qucsator used a fixed time step. Ngspice, Xyce and
SPICE OPUS use adaptive time steps. The number of simulation points
output during a simulation will only be approximately equal to the
number of points specified in a *Transient simulation* properties list.
For example, in an example test circuit 200 time points are specified on
the schematic. However, due to the fact that the SPICE simulators use
adaptive time steps, Ngspice employs 213 simulation points, and Xyce
employs 799 time points. This difference should be taken into account
during simulation data post processing or when comparing results.

=== Other forms of simulation

In contrast to SPICE 3f5, the parameter sweep facility found in Qucs has
also been implemented with Ngspice, Xyce and SPICE OPUS where the
parameter sweep setup and control is organized by Qucs-S. The details of
how this sweep feature works is the topic of a later section. As well as
the fundamental DC, AC and transient simulation types, Ngspice, Xyce and
SPICE OPUS also support the additional forms of simulation listed in
Table link:#Table3[2.3].

[[Table3]]
.Qucs-S simulation types additional to DC, AC and TRAN
[cols="<,<,<,<",options="header",]
|===
|*Simulation type* |*Ngspice* |*Xyce* |*SPICE OPUS*
|Fourier |x |x |x
|Distortion |x | |x
|Noise |x |x |x
|Pole-zero |x | |x
|Sensitivity |x |x |x
|Harmonic Balance |x |x |
|S-parameter analysis |x |x |
|TRAN shooting method |x | |x
|Custom simulation |x |x |
|===

Fourier, distortion pole-zero circuit simulation require special GUI
icons. These can be found in the Qucs *SPICE simulations* group. In
contrast sensitivity, the SPICE OPUS tran shooting method are accessed
Custom simulation techniques. Again, these topics are introduced in
detail in later chapters.

=== Qucs-S circuit simulation components

Qucs is released with a good selection of passive and active component
models. This selection includes both fundamental circuit components R,
C, L and collections of devices for a given circuit design sector, like
the RF microstrip component models. All the original Qucs component and
device models were written to work with Qucs and there is *NO Guarantee*
that they will be work with Ngspice, Xyce or SPICE OPUS. For circuit
simulation packages which take advantage of simulation multi-engines
this can be a serious problem, particularly for the less experienced
user. To help reduce problems to a minimum, Qucs-S uses a policy of
*blacklisting* those models which do not work with the chosen circuit
simulation engine. This policy works in the following way:- when a
specific simulator is chosen by a Qucs-S user, on running the selected
simulator, *ONLY* those models which work with each simulator become
available for drawing circuit schematics and simulation. The same
approach applies to the components held in the Qucs-S libraries.

=== More basic simulation examples

==== DC Example 1: Calculating circuit input resistance and power dissipation in a resistor

image::pics/chap2/DC_EX1.pdf[ DC resistive test network.,width=566]

* Draw the circuit diagram shown in Figure link:#Fig20[2.12],
* Select simulator Ngspice,
* Press key F8 (computes DC bias),
* Determine Rin = V(Pr3)/I(Pr1) = 10/1.66667 = 6 Ohm,
* Calculate the power dissipated in R4 = V(Pr4)*I(Pr2) =
1.66667*0.277778 = 0.463 W.

====  DC Example 2: Variation of power dissipation with varying DC input voltage

image::pics/chap2/DC_EX2.pdf[DC example 1 with varying input voltage:
demonstrating the use of a DC sweep simulation. ,width=566]

* Draw the circuit diagram shown in Figure link:#Fig21[2.13],
* Add the dc simulation, Parameter sweep and Nutmeg component icons to
the drawn schematic,
* Press the F2 to simulate the circuit,
* Plot the graphs illustrated in Figure link:#Fig21[2.13],
* Check that your results are the same - if not or the simulation fails
check your schematic for errors and re-simulate.
* {blank}
+
....
 Note 1: Current probe values are represented by vpr1#branch and $vpr2#branch$ 
....
* {blank}
+
....
 Note 2: There is a discontinuity in Rin when the $vpr1#branch$ current is zero;
                 hence the need for the dummy 1pA in the Nutmeg equation for Rin.
....
